China's State Council Information Office on Saturday released a white
paper titled "China: Democracy That Works."
Xinhua丨Updated: December 4, 2021
China's State Council Information Office on Saturday released a white
paper titled "China: Democracy That Works." The full text is as
follows:

China: Democracy That Works
The State Council Information Office of the People’s
Republic of China

Contents
Preamble
I.

Whole-Process People’s Democracy Under CPC Leadership
II.

A Sound Institutional Framework

III. Concrete and Pragmatic Practices
IV. Democracy That Works
V. A New Model of Democracy
Conclusion

Preamble
Democracy is a common value of humanity and an ideal that has always been cherished
by the Communist Party of China (CPC) and the Chinese people.

1

This year marks the centenary of the CPC. Since its founding in 1921, the Party has
taken wellbeing for the Chinese people and the rejuvenation of the Chinese nation as its
abiding goals, and has made continuous efforts to ensure the people’s status as masters
of the country. China is a country with a feudal history dating back several thousand
years that descended into a semi-feudal and semi-colonial society after the Opium War
of 1840. Over the past hundred years, the Party has led the people in realizing people’s
democracy in China. The Chinese people now truly hold in their hands their own future
and that of society and the country.
The people’s status as masters of the country is the essence of people’s democracy. Since
the 18th CPC National Congress in 2012, with a deeper understanding of China’s path to
democracy and the political system, the Party has developed whole-process people’s
democracy as a key concept and striven to translate it and relevant democratic values
into effective institutions and concrete actions.
Whole-process people’s democracy integrates process-oriented democracy with resultsoriented democracy, procedural democracy with substantive democracy, direct
democracy with indirect democracy, and people’s democracy with the will of the state. It
is a model of socialist democracy that covers all aspects of the democratic process and
all sectors of society. It is a true democracy that works.
Democracy is a concrete phenomenon that is constantly evolving. Rooted in history,
culture and tradition, it takes diverse forms and develops along the paths chosen by
different peoples based on their exploration and innovation.
The best way to evaluate whether a country’s political system is democratic and efficient
is to observe whether the succession of its leaders is orderly and in line with the law,
whether all the people can manage state and social affairs and economic and cultural
2

undertakings in conformity with legal provisions, whether the public can express their
requirements without hindrance, whether all sectors can efficiently participate in the
country’s political affairs, whether national decision-making can be conducted in a
rational and democratic way, whether people of high caliber in all fields can be part of
the national leadership and administrative systems through fair competition, whether the
governing party is in charge of state affairs in accordance with the Constitution and the
law, and whether the exercise of power can be kept under effective restraint and
supervision.
Democracy is not a decorative ornament, but an instrument for addressing the issues that
concern the people. Whether a country is democratic depends on whether its people are
truly the masters of the country; whether the people have the right to vote, and more
importantly, the right to participate extensively; whether they have been given verbal
promises in elections, and more importantly, how many of these promises are fulfilled
after elections; whether there are set political procedures and rules in state systems and
laws, and more importantly, whether these systems and laws are truly enforced; whether
the rules and procedures for the exercise of power are democratic, and more importantly,
whether the exercise of power is genuinely subject to public scrutiny and checks.
Democracy is the right of the people in every country, rather than the prerogative of a
few nations. Whether a country is democratic should be judged by its people, not
dictated by a handful of outsiders. Whether a country is democratic should be
acknowledged by the international community, not arbitrarily decided by a few selfappointed judges. There is no fixed model of democracy; it manifests itself in many
forms. Assessing the myriad political systems in the world against a single yardstick and
examining diverse political structures in monochrome are in themselves undemocratic.
3

In the richly diverse world, democracy comes in many forms. China’s democracy is
thriving alongside those of other countries in the garden of civilizations. China stands
ready to contribute its experience and strength to global political progress through
cooperation and mutual learning.

I. Whole-Process People’s Democracy Under CPC
Leadership
China is a diligent and wise nation with a long history. It has created a brilliant political
civilization. All of five thousand years ago, ancient Chinese began to explore the concept
that people are the foundation of a state. Their ideas contained the seeds of what we
know today as democracy. However, over the centuries of feudal autocracy, the people
were always the oppressed and exploited underclass.
After the 1840s, China gradually descended into a semi-feudal and semi-colonial society.
There was no popular democracy at all and the country was on the verge of collapse. The
people stood up and fought to salvage their country. Revolution and reform were
attempted, and many plans for saving the country were introduced, none of which
succeeded.
Following the Revolution of 1911, the Chinese people made numerous attempts to
introduce the Western political systems, including the parliamentary system, multiparty
system, and presidential system, all of which ended in failure.
The rise of the New Culture Movement championing democracy and science, the victory
of the October Revolution in Russia, the May 4th Movement, and the spread of Marxism
in China, began to awaken the Chinese people, and progressive individuals gained a
deeper understanding of democracy and came up with new ideas.

4

The founding of the CPC in 1921 was like a beacon, illuminating the way towards
democracy in China.
During the New Democratic Revolution (1919-1949), the Party led the people in their
tenacious fight for democracy, resisting oppression and exploitation in the course of their
struggle. Ultimately, victory was secured in the revolution.
On October 1, 1949, the People’s Republic of China (PRC) was founded. This marked
the ultimate transformation of the country from the rule of feudal autocracy, which had
been in existence for several thousand years, to a people’s democracy. It proclaimed that
the Chinese people had stood upright. It ushered in a new era for democracy in China. It
turned a dream into reality – the people running their own country.
During socialist revolution and reconstruction (1949-1978), the CPC united and led the
people in:
• building and consolidating state power;
• completing the socialist transformation of the means of production;
• promulgating the first Constitution of the PRC;
• establishing the system of people’s congresses, the system of CPC-led multiparty
cooperation and political consultation, and the system of regional ethnic
autonomy.
The political structure, economic foundation, legal principles, and institutional
framework for the people to run their country were all put in place and have since
developed steadily. China’s tower of democracy was built on strong foundations and
stands tall.

5

In the years of reform, opening up and socialist modernization after 1978, the Party led
the people in advancing socialist democracy and the rule of law, sticking to the path of
socialist political progress with Chinese characteristics.
It ensured the Party’s leadership, the people’s status as masters of the country, and lawbased governance, and advanced reform of the political structure in an active and steady
manner. The system of people’s congresses was consolidated and developed. The system
of CPC-led multiparty cooperation and political consultation, the system of regional
ethnic autonomy, the system of community-level self-governance, and other basic
political systems were improved.
The political and institutional guarantees and material conditions for developing
democracy were reinforced.
Since the Party’s 18th National Congress in 2012, socialism with Chinese characteristics
has entered a new era. The CPC Central Committee with Xi Jinping at the core has built
a keen understanding of how the principal challenge facing Chinese society has changed.
It has worked hard to respond to the people’s new requirements and expectations for
democracy. After drawing on past experience in maintaining order and stability across
the world, and reviewing China’s progress in democracy, the CPC decided to develop
whole-process people’s democracy, beginning a new stage of democracy. Some of the
most important achievements are:
• strengthening the CPC’s overall leadership, reforming Party and government
institutions, and reinforcing the Party’s leadership over the development of wholeprocess people’s democracy;
• modernizing China’s governance system and capacity;

6

• establishing and upholding the fundamental, basic, and important systems of
Chinese socialism, with a more complete institutional framework to ensure the
people’s status as masters of the country;
• advancing democratic elections, consultations, decision-making, management,
and oversight, progressing electoral democracy and consultative democracy side
by side, and expanding the people’s orderly political participation and the scope of
democracy;
• consolidating the people’s principal position in the country’s political and social
life;
• leveraging the institutional strengths of Chinese socialism;
• promoting political stability, unity and vitality;
• building a nationwide force towards the country’s goals in the new era;
• achieving a strategic success in the fight against the Covid-19 epidemic;
• ending absolute poverty, and completing the building of a moderately prosperous
society in all respects.
China has addressed major risks and set out on a new journey towards a modern socialist
country and common prosperity, demonstrating the viability and strength of wholeprocess people’s democracy. The Chinese people have greater confidence in China’s
democracy, and can now look forward to a bright future.
Whole-process people’s democracy is a creation of the CPC in leading the people to
pursue, develop and realize democracy, embodying the Party’s innovation in advancing
China’s democratic theories, systems and practices. The Party’s history of struggle is a
course of rallying the people and leading them to explore, establish and develop wholeprocess people’s democracy. It is a logical outcome of history, theory and practice based
7

on the strenuous efforts of the people under the leadership of the Party. It is a requisite
for maintaining the very nature of the Party and fulfilling its fundamental purpose.
Whole-process people’s democracy, giving full expression to the socialist nature of the
state and the people’s principal position, serves to better represent the people’s will,
protect their rights and fully unleash their potential to create. Whole-process people’s
democracy has formed and developed in a nationwide effort, led by the CPC, to strive
for national independence, the country’s prosperity, and the people’s liberation and
wellbeing. It is rooted in this vast land, nourished by the culture and traditions of the
Chinese civilization, and draws on the achievements of human civilization. Suited to the
conditions in China and embraced by the people, it has solid foundations and a bright
future.
Whole-process people’s democracy is a complete system with supporting mechanisms
and procedures, and has been fully tested through wide participation. It integrates two
major democratic models – electoral democracy and consultative democracy. It operates
a democratic system covering a population of more than 1.4 billion from 56 ethnic
groups of a vast country, making possible the wide and sustained participation of all its
people. Whole-process people’s democracy has distinctive Chinese characteristics; it
also exemplifies common values and contributes China’s ideas and solutions to the
political progress of humanity.
CPC leadership is the fundamental guarantee for whole-process people’s democracy. It is
no easy job for a country as big as China to fully represent and address the concerns of
its 1.4 billion people. It must have a robust and centralized leadership.
Committed to people-centered development and ensuring their principal status to run the
country, the CPC governs for the people and by relying on the people. The CPC plays to
8

the full its role as overall leader and coordinator in all areas of endeavor in every part of
the country, to ensure that the people run the country effectively and that the people’s
democracy is an overarching philosophy, principle and policy in the country’s political
and social life.
The CPC follows the mass line – it is committed to doing everything for the people and
relying on them, and follows the principle of “from the people, to the people”. It
maintains close ties with the people and pools their wisdom and strength.
The CPC upholds democracy within the Party and practices democratic elections,
decision-making, management and oversight, to better serve the development of people’s
democracy. The CPC has improved its mechanism for selecting and appointing officials,
enabling outstanding individuals in all sectors to enter the Party leadership teams and the
government, and ensuring that the leadership of the Party and the state rests in the hands
of those loyal to Marxism, the Party, and the people.
The CPC upholds law-based governance of the country. It exercises leadership over
legislation, guarantees law enforcement, supports judicial justice, and plays an
exemplary role in abiding by the law. Through advancing the rule of law, the Party
ensures that its policies are effectively implemented and that the people run the country
as its masters.

II. A Sound Institutional Framework
In China, the people’s status as masters of the country is the bedrock of all the systems
of the country, and underlies the operation of all the systems for state governance.
Whole-process people’s democracy involves complete institutional procedures. These
well-coordinated and comprehensive institutional procedures serve to put into place
9

diverse, open, and well-organized democratic channels to ensure that the Party’s policies
and the state will are integrated with the people’s aspirations, and that the people are
masters of the country.
1. The Governing System of the People’s Democratic Dictatorship
The Constitution describes China as a socialist country governed by a people’s
democratic dictatorship that is led by the working class and based on an alliance of
workers and peasants. The fundamental nature of the state is defined by the people’s
democratic dictatorship.
China upholds the unity of democracy and dictatorship to ensure the people’s status as
masters of the country. On the one hand, all power of the state belongs to the people to
ensure that they administer state affairs and manage economic and cultural undertakings
and social affairs through various channels and in various ways in accordance with the
Constitution and laws; on the other hand, China takes resolute action against any attempt
to subvert the country’s political power or endanger public or state security, to uphold
the dignity and order of law and safeguard the interests of the people and the state.
Democracy and dictatorship appear to be a contradiction in terms, but together they
ensure the people’s status as masters of the country. A tiny minority is sanctioned in the
interests of the great majority, and “dictatorship” serves democracy.
2. The Governing Structure of the System of People’s Congresses
The system of people’s congresses, an organizational form of political power compatible
with the governing system of the people’s democratic dictatorship, is China’s
fundamental political system, and the ultimate approach and optimal solution to
guaranteeing the people’s status as masters of the country. It is also an important
institutional support to whole-process people’s democracy. Under this system, all power

10

of the state belongs to the people to guarantee their status as masters of the country. At
the same time, it integrates the Party’s leadership, the people’s principal position, and the
rule of law, to help the country avoid the historical cycle of rise and fall of ruling orders
apparent through the centuries of imperial dynasty. Under this system, all the major
political relationships with a bearing on the nation’s future are properly managed, and all
social undertakings operate under the effective centralized organization of the state. This
maintains national unity and ethnic solidarity, and ensures that vigor, stability and order
prevail in the country’s political life.
The people exercise state power effectively through people’s congresses; people’s
congresses exercise state power collectively on behalf of the people. The National
People’s Congress (NPC) is the highest organ of state power. Local people’s congresses
at all levels are local agencies of state power. All administrative, supervisory, judicial,
and procuratorial organs of the state are created by the people’s congresses, to which
they are responsible and by which they are supervised.
The people’s congresses have four main functions and powers:
• Legislation. The NPC and its Standing Committee exercise the legislative power
of the state. The NPC exercises the powers and functions to amend the
Constitution and enact and amend basic laws governing criminal offenses, civil
affairs, state agencies and other matters;
• Appointment and removal of officials. The NPC exercises the powers and
functions to appoint or remove the president and vice president(s) of the PRC, the
premier, vice premier(s) and other members of the State Council, the chairperson
and other members of the Central Military Commission, the chairperson of the

11

National Supervisory Commission, the president of the Supreme People’s Court,
and the procurator-general of the Supreme People’s Procuratorate;
• Decision-making. The NPC exercises the powers and functions to examine and
approve major issues significant to national development and the interests of the
people, such as the plan for national economic and social development and the
report on its implementation, and state budget and the report on its
implementation;
• Supervision. The NPC and its Standing Committee exercise the right of
overseeing the enforcement of the Constitution and the work of the State Council,
the National Supervisory Commission, the Supreme People’s Court and the
Supreme People’s Procuratorate.
Local people’s congresses and their standing committees exercise corresponding powers
and functions as prescribed by law. The system of people’s congresses makes extensive
democracy possible by empowering people’s congresses at all levels, to ensure that the
people hold and exercise state power, and that they keep the nation’s future firmly in
their hands.
The deputies to people’s congresses are fully representative of the people. They come
from all regions, ethnic groups, sectors and social groups, and function at national,
provincial, city, county and township levels. At the end of 2020, 2.62 million people
were serving as deputies to people’s congresses at all levels nationwide. Among them,
those at county and township levels accounted for 94.5 percent of the total. Making full
use of their close connections with the people, these deputies diligently fulfill their duties
by soliciting and submitting the people’s suggestions and advice through various forms
and channels.
The annual people’s congresses are first held from the grassroots upwards at township,
county, city, and provincial levels and then at the highest national level, to take full
12

cognizance of the people’s aspirations and report them to upper levels. Since the launch
of reform and opening up in 1978, about 3,000 NPC deputies have gathered in the
presence of the Party and state leaders at the NPC session each year to discuss plans for
national development and problems affecting people’s lives, and to put the people’s
expectations at the top of the agenda on state matters. Many of the motions and proposals
put forward by deputies have been carefully reviewed and then included into policy
decisions of state organs.
The system of people’s congresses has provided institutional guarantee for the CPC to
lead the people in effectively running the country. It enables the Party to turn its
proposals into state policies, and to place the candidates recommended by Party
organizations into positions as state leaders through statutory procedures. It also
empowers the organs of state governance to exercise the Party’s leadership over the
country and society, to uphold the authority of the Party and the state, and to safeguard
the unity and solidarity of the Party and the country. The system of people’s congresses
is the optimal choice, in accord with China’s national conditions and realities. It
embodies the socialist nature of the state and guarantees the people’s principal position
and national rejuvenation. It must be fully implemented, further enriched, and
maintained as a long-term institution.
3. The System of Multiparty Cooperation and Political Consultation Under
CPC Leadership
The system of multiparty cooperation and political consultation under the leadership of
the CPC is a basic element of China’s political framework. The Constitution stipulates,
“The system of multiparty cooperation and political consultation under the leadership of
the Communist Party of China will continue and develop long into the future.” A new

13

model grown out of the soil of China, it also learns from other countries and absorbs the
fruits of their political achievements.
In China, there are no opposition parties. But China’s political party system is not a
system of one-party rule. Nor is it one in which multiple parties vie for power and
govern in turn. It is a multiparty cooperation system in which the CPC exercises state
power. In addition to the CPC, there are eight other political parties. The other parties
participate fully in the administration of state affairs under the leadership of the CPC.
Under the shared banner of people’s democracy, and respecting the principles of longterm coexistence, mutual oversight, sincerity, and sharing the rough times and the
smooth, the CPC and the other parties have created a new political party system with
distinctive Chinese features and strengths.
The CPC is the governing party, and the other parties accept its leadership. They
cooperate closely with the CPC and function as its advisors and assistants. Through
forums, talks, and written and other forms of consultation, the CPC consults with the
other parties and prominent individuals without affiliation to any political party (nonaffiliates) on major national and local policies and matters. It willingly accepts the
democratic scrutiny of the other parties and the non-affiliates. In the exercise of state
power, the CPC works together with the other parties and the nonaffiliates. Members of
the other parties and the non-affiliates account for a certain percentage of the total
numbers of deputies to people’s congresses, the standing committees of people’s
congresses, and the special committees of people’s congresses at all levels. Some of
them occupy leading posts in state organs. The other parties and the non-affiliates
actively deliberate on and participate in the administration of state affairs. They are

14

valued advisors on key national programs and contributors to the development of the
country.
Panel 1 Political Consultation
Since the 18th CPC National Congress in 2012, the CPC Central Committee has organized
or entrusted relevant departments to organize more than 170 consultative forums. On these
occasions, it has engaged in consultation with the other parties and the non-affiliates and
solicited their opinions on matters of great importance such as the CPC Central Committee
reports to CPC national congresses and the Political Bureau reports to plenary sessions of the
CPC Central Committee. It has called for their advice on amendments to the Constitution, on the
drafting of medium and long-term plans for economic and social development, and on candidates
for positions as leaders of the state. Its goal is to ensure more informed and democratic decisionmaking on major issues. Central committees of the other parties, together with the non-affiliates,
have conducted in-depth field work and made more than 730 written proposals, many of which
have become major state policies. Proceeding from reality, CPC local committees at all levels
conduct consultations with corresponding local organizations of the other parties on important
local issues, creating a driving force for the development of the local economy and society.

The Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) serves as a key
element of the multiparty mechanism. A specialized body for socialist consultative
democracy, the CPPCC promotes unity, strengthens multiparty cooperation, and
practices people’s democracy in the process of political consultation. It maintains the
traditions of the past, and keeps pace with the times. It reflects the distinctive features
and strengths of China’s socialist democracy – problems are solved through consultation.
It is a key component of the state governance system, and a distinctively Chinese
political institution.
Through the institutions of the CPPCC, representatives from all political parties,
people’s organizations, ethnic groups, and social sectors engage in political consultation.
They carry out their routine duties through mechanisms such as plenary sessions,
meetings of the standing committee, meetings of chairpersons, meetings of special
committees, forums on specific subjects, and consultative seminars, and make proposals,
conduct inspections and field surveys, and report on social conditions and public
opinions on a regular basis. In this way, they conduct extensive, constructive
15

consultations on an equal footing and in an orderly manner, and put forward opinions
and suggestions on important national strategies and policies and major economic and
social matters. The CPC collects these opinions and suggestions and adopts those which
are sound, while the other participants accept the Party’s propositions and promote its
guidelines and policies. In doing so, they increase trust and dispel doubts, convey the
will of the people and draw on their wisdom, and build the broadest consensus, so as to
form a shared ideological foundation for collective endeavors.
When the annual sessions of the NPC and the CPPCC National Committee (Two
Sessions) are held concurrently each year, members of the CPPCC National Committee
submit proposals for deliberation. They also sit in on NPC sessions to participate in the
discussions on the amendments to laws and on the work reports of the central
government, the Supreme People’s Court, and the Supreme People’s Procuratorate. This
mechanism ensures that all the people can play a part in overseeing the work of the
government, and forms China’s own model of democracy based on the Two Sessions.
Panel 2 Biweekly Consultative Forums Convened by
the CPPCC National Committee
Biweekly consultative forums convened by the CPPCC National
Committee constitute an important innovation in China’s consultative
democracy. Forums on specific topics are the standard model, attended by
specific participating groups and relevant Party and government departments.
They integrate consultations on specific subjects, consultations on the handling
of proposals, and consultations with relevant Party and government
departments and with specific social groups. The biweekly consultative forums
are designed to solicit advice and proposals on major economic and social
development issues, leveraging the role of the CPPCC as an important channel
and a specialized body for socialist consultative democracy. In total, 132 such
forums were held between October 22, 2013 and November 6, 2021.

The system of multiparty cooperation and political consultation under the leadership of
the CPC is an extensive and reliable means of representing and fulfilling the interests of
16

the maximum number of people of all ethnic groups and social sectors. It avoids the
drawbacks of the old political party system that stood for only a small number of people
and interest groups. It unites all political parties and the non-affiliates towards a common
goal, effectively mitigating the risks of inadequate oversight in one-party rule, and the
problems of continual transfers of governing parties and destructive competition in
multiparty political systems. Through standardized institutional procedures and
arrangements, it pools ideas and suggestions to ensure informed and democratic
decision-making. It avoids the weakness of Western-style political party systems: When
making decisions and exercising governance, political parties act in their own interests or
the interests of the classes, regions and groups they represent, provoking division in
society.
4. Broad Patriotic United Front
The united front is an important structure through which the CPC earns popular support
and pools strengths. In practicing people’s democracy, the Party has always placed the
united front in an important position, striving to achieve great unity and solidarity and
balance commonality and diversity. The Party has made coordinated efforts to unite the
other political parties, the non-affiliates, intellectuals who are not CPC members,
members of ethnic minorities and religious groups, people working in non-public
sectors, people belonging to new social groups, compatriots in Hong Kong, Macao and
Taiwan, and overseas Chinese and returned Chinese nationals. It has combined all the
forces that can be united and mobilized all positive factors to build a broad consensus,
expand common ground, and achieve convergence of interests. In order to pool the
wisdom and strength of the Chinese nation to the full, it has systematically promoted

17

harmonious relations between political parties, between ethnic groups, between religions,
between social groups and between Chinese people at home and overseas.
The CPPCC is an organization of the Chinese people’s patriotic united front. It is
composed of representatives from 34 sectors, including the CPC, the other political
parties, the non-affiliates, people’s organizations, ethnic minority groups and other
sectors, compatriots from the Hong Kong and Macao Special Administrative Regions
and Taiwan, returned Chinese nationals, and specially invited public figures. The First
Session of the 13th National Committee of the CPPCC was attended by over 2,100
members, 60.2 percent of whom are non-CPC members. This demonstrates its important
function as a center of unity and solidarity. It allows us to mobilize all positive factors
and forces that cherish patriotism and support the CPC’s leadership, and build a strong
alliance for the rejuvenation of the Chinese nation by seeking common ground while
setting aside differences.
5. The System of Regional Ethnic Autonomy
China is a unified multiethnic state. The CPC’s ethnic policies are built upon the
goals of forging a keen sense of national identity, maintaining territorial integrity and
national unification, and achieving common development and prosperity through the joint
efforts of all ethnic groups. The system of regional ethnic autonomy means that areas
with large ethnic minority populations can practice regional autonomy, establish
autonomous organs, and exercise the power of self-government under the unified
leadership of the state. This basic political system is specified in the country’s
Constitution and its Law on Regional Ethnic Autonomy.
China’s regional ethnic autonomy is autonomy under the unified leadership of the state.
Territorial integrity and national unification are preconditions and foundations for
regional ethnic autonomy, which combines unification with autonomy and ethnic factors
with regional factors, and are thoroughly suited to China’s realities. All ethnic
autonomous areas are inseparable parts of the country, and all autonomous organs of

18

these areas are local governments subject to the unified leadership of the central
government.
Regional ethnic autonomy provides institutional and policy guarantees to ensure that
ethnic minority citizens enjoy rights to equality and freedom, and to economic, social
and cultural services. On all standing committees of people’s congresses of the 155
ethnic autonomous areas, there are citizens from the local ethnic groups assuming the
office of chair or vice chair; all governors, prefectural commissioners, and heads of
counties of ethnic autonomous areas are citizens from the ethnic groups. The central
government assists all ethnic minority areas in accelerating their economic and cultural
development based on the characteristics and needs of the ethnic minorities there.
The system of regional ethnic autonomy has greatly increased the sense of pride and
responsibility of people of all ethnic groups and stimulated their enthusiasm, initiative
and creativity in jointly steering the course to a bright future. Under this institutional
framework, communication and exchanges between ethnic groups, and socialist ethnic
relations characterized by equality, unity, mutual assistance and harmony, have
expanded. Ethnic unity has been reinforced, and a strong sense of national identity has
been forged.
6. The System of Community-Level Self-Governance
Due to China’s huge population and vast territory, there is great diversity in communitylevel governance. China applies a system of community-level self-governance
represented by villagers autonomy, urban residents autonomy, and employees
congresses. Under the leadership and support of community-level Party organizations,
local residents directly exercise the democratic right to manage their own affairs by

19

serving the community, undertaking self-education, and exercising public scrutiny. This
effectively ensures that the people’s rights are genuinely respected.
Villagers and urban residents exercise self-governance. Under the leadership of
community-level Party organizations, residents in China’s rural villages and urban
communities establish villagers committees and residents committees, and directly
exercise their democratic right to handle public affairs and public services in residential
areas to which they belong:
• They hold democratic elections in which they elect villagers and residents
committees.
• They conduct democratic consultation on local affairs in various forms.
• They practice democratic decision-making in handling community public affairs
and public services through committee meetings and congresses.
• They carry out democratic management – they discuss and decide on their own
rules on self-governance and codes of conduct and self-regulation, and run their
affairs accordingly.
• They exercise democratic oversight – they elect village and urban community
affairs oversight committees to supervise the handling of their community affairs
and guarantee information disclosure.
As of the end of 2020, all the 503,000 administrative villages in China had established
villagers committees, and all the 112,000 urban communities in the country had
established residents committees.
Employees in enterprises and public institutions exercise democratic rights. Enterprises
and public institutions practice a system of democratic management whose basic form is
employees congresses, so that workers and staff can play an active role in decision20

making on important matters concerning their immediate interests. They are
implementing a system of employees serving as board directors and board supervisors.
They have all employed a system featuring open access to enterprise affairs and are
experimenting with practices that include open days to communicate with leaders,
employee-employer consultations, and letters and messages to senior executives. These
efforts are designed to mediate labor relations, listen to workers’ voices, protect their
lawful rights and interests, and collect complaints and suggestions on the operations,
management and development of these entities. Corporate trade union committees are
the operating mechanism of employees congresses. At present, there are 2.81 million
primary-level trade unions in China, covering 6.55 million enterprises and public
institutions.
Democratic innovations demonstrate great vitality. The Chinese people have explored
and initiated numerous popular and pragmatic grassroots practices – residents councils,
residents workshops, democratic discussions and hearings, courtyard discussions,
neighborhood meetings, offline roundtables and online group chats. They have arranged
for representatives of Party committees, deputies to the people’s congresses, and CPPCC
members to visit rural and urban communities. All these down-to-earth and pragmatic
forms of democracy encourage people to voice their opinions and suggestions and
conduct extensive consultation on matters related to their vital interests. This helps to
coordinate the interests of multiple stakeholders, mitigate conflict, and maintain social
stability and harmony at the grassroots level. Many successful grassroots experiences
and practices have eventually turned into national policies, injecting new vitality into the
development of China’s democracy.
Panel 3 The Fengqiao Model
21

In the early 1960s, the officials and citizenry of Fengqiao Town in Zhejiang Province
began a drive to solve problems in situ rather than passing them up to higher authorities. As a
result, social order was well maintained and people lived in peace. The practice has developed
over the intervening decades, and is now a model for promoting community-level governance
and social harmony. What is commendable is that the local people, under the leadership of the
Party, are able to solve small problems within their village, and serious ones within the town,
so as to maintain social stability and promote development.

The system of community-level self-governance has strengthened the public’s ability to
understand and practice democracy, demonstrating that China’s democracy is extensive
and genuine. Community-level self-governance energizes all the “cells” of society. It
makes grassroots governance more vibrant and efficient, and provides a solid
institutional guarantee for a grassroots governance system in which responsibilities are
shared and duly fulfilled, and achievements are enjoyed by all.

III. Concrete and Pragmatic Practices
Whole-process people’s democracy in China is a complete system with supporting
mechanisms and procedures, and has been fully tested through wide participation.
China’s whole-process people’s democracy is a combination of electoral democracy and
consultative democracy, and is applied through a combination of elections, consultations,
decision-making, management and oversight. It covers the economic, political, cultural,
social, eco-environmental and other fields, with a focus on national development, social
governance and people’s lives.
Whole-process people’s democracy is a comprehensive and coordinated system
involving extensive and regular participation, ensuring that the people’s voices are heard
and their wishes are represented in every aspect of China’s political and social life.
Whole-process people’s democracy prevents individuals from manipulating the political
process to win elections, and leaves no room for politicians to shower promises while
campaigning and break them all once elected.
1. Democratic Election
22

By exercising their right to vote in elections, the people elect those who represent their
will to hold and exercise power. This is an important form of democracy in China, and a
clear demonstration of the people’s status as masters of the country.
Elections in China are extensive and cover all aspects of the country’s political and
social life. They include elections to government institutions, villagers and urban
residents committees, and employees congresses in enterprises and public institutions.
Elections in China are based on equality, and the people’s right to
vote and stand for election is fully guaranteed. Each person can cast one vote, and all
votes are of equal value.
Elections in China are genuine and not manipulated by financial interests. Voters are free
to vote for the candidates they trust.
Elections in China are progressing in a positive direction with the progress of the
economy and society.
Elections to state organs. These include elections to the NPC and the local people’s
congresses at all levels, and those in which deputies to people’s congresses elect leading
officials of state organs at the corresponding levels. All citizens of the PRC who have
reached the age of 18 – with the exception of those persons deprived of political rights in
accordance with the law – have the right to vote and stand for election.
In accordance with the principles of universal suffrage, equal rights, multiple candidates,
and secret ballot, deputies to people’s congresses at the township and county levels are
elected directly by the public. Deputies to people’s congresses at the city, provincial and
national levels are elected by people’s congresses at the next level below. All deputies
are elected for a term of five years. Leading officials of state organs at various levels are
appointed or elected by people’s congresses at the corresponding levels.
23

Panel 4 The World’s Largest Community-Level Elections
In 2016 and 2017, more than 900 million voters participated in the elections to people’s
congresses at the township and county levels – the world’s largest direct elections.
The elections involved more than 32,000 townships and 2,850 counties. Nearly 2.48 million
deputies were directly elected to people’s congresses at the two levels, and on this basis, new
leaderships of state organs at these two levels were elected.

Community-level elections. Elections at the grassroots level are the most extensive and
dynamic form of democracy in China. They include elections of villagers committees,
urban residents committees, and employees congresses in enterprises and public
institutions.
Villagers and urban residents committees are composed of chairpersons, vice
chairpersons and members, and the elections are held simultaneously with those at the
township and county levels.
Employees congresses – elected by all employees – are the bodies through which
employees exercise their democratic management rights and make their own decisions in
enterprises and public institutions.
China’s democratic elections are adapted to the country’s national conditions and stage
of socio-economic development. Over recent decades, the Electoral Law of the National
People’s Congress and Local People’s Congresses has been amended progressively.
The ratio of deputy representation in people’s congresses has been optimized – in 1953
there was an imbalance between urban areas and rural areas that gave urban residents
eight times more representation than rural residents. By 1995 this ratio had fallen to 4:1,
and by 2010 there was parity – urban and rural residents had equal levels of
representation.
As the understanding of democracy has grown, so has the number of people participating
in elections. Since the initiation of reform and opening up, China has held 12 direct

24

elections to people’s congresses at the township level and 11 direct elections to those at
the county level, with a current participation rate of about 90 percent.
2. Democratic Consultation
Whenever a problem occurs, those concerned should always hold deliberations in good
faith. Matters involving many people are discussed by all those involved; to reach the
greatest common ground based on the wishes and needs of the whole of society is the
essence of people’s democracy. The Chinese people widely exercise their right to vote in
elections and undertake extensive deliberations before major decisions are made.
Democratic consultation is a special feature of democracy in China.
Democratic consultation has been established on the basis of solid cultural, theoretical,
practical and institutional foundations. It derives from the best of traditional Chinese
culture, including such ideas as aspiring for the common good, mutual understanding
and inclusiveness, and seeking common ground while setting aside differences.
It comes from years of tenacious struggle by the Chinese people led by the CPC.
It originates from the political system created by all parties, organizations, ethnic groups,
social groups and people from all walks of life since the founding of the PRC.
It also stems from China’s continuous innovation in its state institutions since reform and
opening up.
Democratic consultation takes many forms. In making and implementing decisions on
major issues concerning reform, development and stability, and on matters bearing on
the vital interests of the people, China conducts extensive consultations in all fields and
at levels through various channels, including proposals, conferences, discussions,
seminars, hearings, assessments, consultations, the internet, and opinion polls.

25

On matters that have a bearing on the interests of everyone, extensive consultations will
be held throughout the whole of society; on matters that concern the interests of people
in one specific region, consultations will be held locally; on matters that affect the
interests of certain groups of people, consultations will be held among those groups; and
on matters that concern the interests of a community, consultations will be held within
the community.
The system of democratic consultation has improved. To promote the broad-based,
multilevel and institutionalized development of consultative democracy, China has
explored and expanded consultation channels to include consultations carried out by
political parties, people’s congresses, government departments, CPPCC committees,
people’s organizations, social organizations, and communities.
• The CPC and other political parties carry out consultations on major documents
of the CPC National Congress and the Central Committee, the revision of the
Constitution, the formulation and revision of major laws, the selection of
candidates for state leaders, medium and long-term programs of socio-economic
development, annual plan of socio-economic development, and major issues
related to reform, development and stability, the united front, and multiparty
cooperation.
• In exercising their functions and powers, people’s congresses at all levels engage
in deliberations with government departments, social organizations, experts and
academics, and the general public.
• Governments at all levels, when performing their duties, strengthen
communication with deputies to people’s congresses, members of CPPCC

26

committees, and representatives from the other political parties, the non-affiliates,
people’s organizations, social organizations, and all sectors of society.
• Under the leadership of the CPC, the CPPCC carries out extensive consultations
and build consensus on matters concerning reform, development, and stability.
• People’s organizations conduct consultations with relevant government
departments on matters concerning the people’s vital interests, especially those
concerning the rights and interests of particular groups, and participate in
consultations organized by the CPPCC.
• CPC organizations, government departments, and people’s organizations for selfgovernance at the grassroots level, economic and social organizations, and local
people deliberate over issues concerning the development of local communities
and the vital interests of the people.
• Social organizations participate in or carry out consultations to better serve
society.
With these seven consultation channels in place, China practices a rich and extensive
form of democracy.
China draws on collective wisdom and promotes full expression and in-depth exchange
of different ideas and viewpoints through democratic consultation. Parties to these
consultations respect each other, consult on an equal footing, follow the rules, hold
orderly discussions, stay inclusive and tolerant, and negotiate in good faith. In this way,
a positive environment for consultation has been cultivated in which everyone can
express their own views freely, rationally and in accordance with the law and rules.
Through democratic consultation, China has built consensus and promoted social
harmony and stability.
27

3. Democratic Decision-Making
Democratic decision-making is an important link in China’s whole-process people’s
democracy. Reflecting the will of the people, sound decision-making ensures their rights
and interests and improves their wellbeing. In China, the standard practice is to hear
people’s voices, act on their needs, and pool their ideas and strength. More and more
ideas and suggestions of the general public are flowing directly to decision-makers at all
levels, and they are increasingly reflected in the major decisions of the Party and the
government.
Panel 5 Collecting Opinions When Formulating the 14th Five-Year Plan
The recommendations of the CPC Central Committee on formulating the 14th Five-year
Plan were drafted following a number of seminars, open discussions, and collection of public
opinion.
General Secretary Xi Jinping chaired a symposium on the integrated development of the
Yangtze River Delta region, and seminars with entrepreneurs, scientists, grassroots
representatives, and experts on economic and social development, education, culture, health, and
sports, to hear their opinions and suggestions.
The draft was circulated among a certain number of Party members and retired senior Party
officials for suggestions, and opinions were also solicited from the central committees of the
other political parties, heads of the All-China Federation of Industry and Commerce, and the
non-affiliates.
More than 1,000 suggestions were collated from a pool of some one million online
messages. The drafting group analyzed them item by item, took them all into consideration, and
accepted all pertinent suggestions. Through thorough deliberation, 366 changes were made to
the draft, reflecting 546 opinions and suggestions.

Open-door legislation by the NPC. People’s congresses at all levels and their standing
committees are committed to democratic lawmaking in the public interest. To reflect
their will in lawmaking, the people’s participation in legislative activities is guaranteed
through various channels, an approach that has won wide public support.
When a piece of legislation is proposed, seminars, hearings and discussions are held to
widely solicit public opinion, so that the people’s will is reflected from the very first
stage of legislation. When a law is being drafted, professionals and the public are both
consulted, and now third parties are entrusted to draft laws and regulations on a trial
28

basis. When a draft law is released, it is subject to public review from online channels
and news media. Through local legislative information offices, people can participate in
the drafting, research, revision, evaluation, and post-assessment of draft laws.
Panel 6 Legislative Information Offices
Legislative information offices collect public views and send them directly to legislative
organs, contributing to progress in targeted, sound legislation. They are also developing new
functions such as overseeing law enforcement, promoting observance of the law, and educating
the public on legal matters.
The first legislative information offices opened for service in 2015. By October 2021 the
Legislative Affairs Commission of the NPC Standing Committee had set up 22 such offices in
21 provinces and equivalent administrative units, covering two thirds of the country. Nearly
7,800 suggestions have been made on 127 legislative drafts and plans through these offices.

Transparent decision-making by the government. Governments at all levels hear the
opinions and suggestions of all sectors on major decisions. Public participation in
decision-making is ensured in various forms and through multiple channels.
At the beginning of the decision-making process, deputies to people’s congresses and
CPPCC members make suggestions and proposals, and citizens, legal persons, and other
organizations can file written suggestions. During the decision-making process, opinions
and suggestions are collected from all social sectors, and especially from those directly
concerned, through formats including seminars, hearings, questionnaires, and field trips.
For public information, the draft decisions and relevant explanatory notes are available
on government websites and media portals. In the last step, the final decision is made
after group discussion based on the principle of democratic centralism. In postassessment, public opinion is solicited once more, and deputies to people’s congresses,
CPPCC members, people’s organizations, grassroots organizations, social organizations,
and experts in various fields are invited to participate.
Grassroots decision-making. This happens in various forms of meeting among rural
villagers and urban residents or their representatives, on a wide range of subjects such as
29

the economy and society, infrastructure, social management, cultural services, ecoenvironmental conservation, the formulation of self-governance regulations, and other
key matters in local governance. Rural villagers and urban residents also take part in
carrying out the decisions they have reached.
4. Democratic Management
In China, the people manage their own affairs. They are the masters of the country and
exercise their democratic rights accordingly, managing affairs of the state, the economy,
culture, and society through various channels and in many forms.
Participation in the management of political and social life. The people exercise their
rights and fulfill their obligations as prescribed by the Constitution. They participate in
elections, consultations, decision-making, and oversight, and manage other areas of
political and social life, fully enjoying their rights of information, participation,
expression, and scrutiny.
Democratic management of urban and rural communities. As per the Constitution,
relevant laws and regulations, urban and rural residents can set rules and conventions to
govern their communities. Through discussion, they can decide residents’ rights and
obligations, the coordination rules and procedures between local organizations, and
general principles for the collective economy, neighborhood security, fire safety,
community sanitation, marriage, neighborhood relations, family planning, and activities
concerning cultural progress. All urban and rural communities are run by their residents,
who manage the public affairs and public services in their communities, exercise selfsupervision, and seek to improve their lives.
Democratic management of enterprises and public institutions. With autonomy in their
business operations and management, more than 150 million market entities are thriving
30

across the country, providing job opportunities to over 700 million people, increasing
China’s national strength and promoting steady growth in economic and social wealth.
In accordance with the Constitution, relevant laws and regulations, enterprises and public
institutions are run under democratic management through their employees congresses.
The framework features disclosure of information on the affairs of enterprises, and
systems for employees to serve on the board of directors and the board of supervisors.
Under this framework, employees participate in business management, and protect their
own legitimate rights and interests. In this way enterprises and their employees develop
and maintain management mechanisms through consultation, and share the benefits they
create.
A total of 3.14 million enterprises have established employees congresses, including
2.94 million private enterprises.
Panel 7 Grassroots Self-Governance Organizations in Covid-19 Response
Since Covid-19 hit China, China’s grassroots self-governance organizations have worked
closely with the government to fight the virus, creating a strong line of defense at the community
level.
Some 650,000 urban and rural communities with more than 4 million community workers
mobilized all forces available, including volunteers, officials and Party members sent to work in
communities, and members from local enterprises and public institutions, to conduct screening
for infection, stand guard, carry out disinfection, and provide care and assistance to local
residents. They made an important contribution to safeguarding public health and the fight
against Covid-19.

Democratic management of social organizations. Associations, foundations, social
services and other social organizations formulate their own charters and exercise
autonomy in managing their staff and activities. They address the concerns of their staff
and clients, and hear their opinions. They participate in the governance of public affairs
as appropriate to their role, and contribute to improving professional discipline, public
services and charitable undertakings.

31

As of November 2021, more than 900,000 social organizations were registered with
departments of civil affairs at all levels, including 2,284 with national networks. Diverse
in form, social organizations have become an important area of people’s democratic
management in China.
5. Democratic Oversight
Comprehensive and effective democratic oversight enables the people to continue to
exercise their democratic rights after elections, and ensures that there is an effective
check on the exercise of power. In China, the abuse of power for personal gain is not
eradicated by the rotation of ruling parties or separation of powers, but by sound,
effective democratic oversight. Taking into consideration its own conditions, China has
explored a coordinated system of oversight and established a well-defined, efficient
supervisory network with clear functions and responsibilities. Supervision of power
extends across every area and into every corner.
Supervision by people’s congresses. People’s congresses play their full role in
overseeing the enforcement of the Constitution and laws, and the implementation of
major decisions and plans. The people’s congresses at all levels and their standing
committees have strengthened their efforts to oversee judicial, supervisory and law
enforcement work by the government, supervisory commissions, people’s courts, and
people’s procuratorates, to ensure that laws and regulations are observed and that
administrative, supervisory, judicial and procuratorial powers are exercised properly.
The people actively participate in supervisory work of the people’s congresses by
various means such as forums of NPC deputies, meetings of people from the grassroots,
questionnaires, online research, etc.

32

Supervision by non-CPC political parties. The CPC encourages the other political parties
and the non-affiliates to exercise democratic oversight by expressing views, making
criticism and giving advice as they participate in political consultation, conduct field
work, take part in inspection and oversight of the implementation of major policies,
decisions and plans of the Party and the state, and carry out targeted scrutiny over major
issues as entrusted by CPC committees, while adhering to the Four Cardinal Principles –
to keep to the path of socialism, to uphold the people’s democratic dictatorship, to
uphold the leadership of the CPC, and to uphold Marxism-Leninism and Mao Zedong
Thought. The political parties, organizations, and prominent figures participating in the
CPPCC can, in accordance with the CPPCC’s charter, oversee in various activities
organized by the CPPCC the implementation of major policies, decisions and plans of
the CPC and the state by offering criticisms and suggestions. Their assistance to the CPC
and the government in solving problems and improving their work increases solidarity.
Administrative supervision. The state administrative organs, in accordance with their
statutory authority, procedures and methods, supervise their own operational and
administrative acts. Different organs supervise each other, and conduct internal
supervision from top to bottom and from bottom to top.
Oversight by supervisory commissions. Supervisory commissions perform their duties of
supervision as provided for by the law. They examine the political conduct of public
servants and supervise their exercise of public power and their fulfillment of professional
ethics; they can also urge relevant organs and units to strengthen education, management
and supervision of their staff.
Judicial supervision. The judicial and procuratorial organs, in accordance with their
statutory purview and procedures, supervise the exercise of public power mandated by
33

the people. Judicial supervision is the most forceful form of oversight of the CPC and the
state; it is the ultimate “line of defense” to ensure lawful exercise of public power.
Auditing supervision. Auditing organs at each level inspect budget performance, audit
the final accounts and the revenues and expenditures of the departments at their level and
of lower-level governments.
Fiscal and accounting supervision. Financial departments are legally empowered to
supervise the enforcement of laws, administrative regulations, and departmental
regulations that govern fiscal and accounting affairs.
Statistical supervision. Statistical departments and relevant offices with statistical
functions and duties supervise all organizations and personnel producing official
statistics, to prevent and punish falsification, and ensure that statistical data are authentic,
accurate, complete, and up to date, providing reliable reference for planning economic
and social development.
Public supervision. Citizens, legal persons and other organizations supervise the
performance of state organs and their staff. They can request administrative review,
initiate administrative litigation, or file complaints or charges with supervisory organs
against any misconduct or crime involving dereliction of duty, abuse of power, or
violation of professional ethics.
Panel 8 People’s Supervisors
Selected from the public through set procedures, people’s supervisors raise suggestions on
public trials, public hearings, the service of legal instruments, evaluation of case handling, prison
and detention house inspections, and inspections of standard judicial practices. They take part in
judicial procedures in an orderly manner and oversee case handling by people’s procuratorates.
Since 2003, procuratorial and judicial administrative bodies have selected and appointed
70,000 people’s supervisors, 23,000 of whom are currently in active service. More than 60,000
cases have come under their supervision.

Supervision by public opinion. The media fulfill their supervisory role by representing
public opinion, exposing in a timely manner abuses of public power, derelictions of duty,
34

and acts of malfeasance. People are now relying more on the fast-growing internet and
other platforms to offer criticisms and suggestions on the work of state organs and public
servants at all levels. The internet is playing a bigger part in facilitating supervision by
public opinion.

IV. Democracy That Works
With complete institutions and extensive participation, whole-process people’s
democracy has evolved from an idea into a system and mechanism of governance that
has taken root in the soil of Chinese society and become part of people’s lives. In
practice, the principle of the people being masters of the country is manifested in the
Party’s governance policies and measures, in all aspects of the work of Party and state
organs at all levels, and in the efforts to meet the people’s expectation for a better life.
The light of democracy has illuminated China’s entire territory, allowing its people to
enjoy extensive and tangible democratic rights.
1. Extensive Rights of the People
The Constitution stipulates that all power in the People’s Republic of China belongs to
the people, and that the people shall, in accordance with the provisions of the law,
manage state affairs, economic and cultural undertakings, and social affairs through
various channels and in various ways. China’s political power is not linked in any way
with personal status, wealth, or social relations, but is equally enjoyed by all the people.
The state power serves the people, rather than capital.
China practices a socialist market economy in which public ownership plays the leading
role alongside other forms of ownership. Distribution according to work is the mainstay,
while other forms of distribution coexist alongside it. This ensures that the lifelines of

35

the Chinese economy remain firmly in the hands of the people, providing solid economic
and material foundations for the people to run their own country.
In China, the people have the right to vote and stand for election. They enjoy the rights
to be informed about, to be involved in, to express views on, and to supervise the state
and social affairs. They have the right to criticize and make suggestions regarding any
state organ or public servant. They enjoy freedom of speech, the press, assembly,
association, procession, demonstration, and religious belief. The Chinese people take
part in the management of state affairs and social, economic, and cultural affairs in an
extensive manner; they also fully exercise their democratic rights in everyday life.
Everyone plays multiple roles in advancing democracy, and enjoys corresponding
democratic rights in the process.
In China, human rights are fully respected and protected. Living a life of contentment is
the ultimate human right. China’s economy has maintained long-term, stable, and rapid
growth, and people’s lives have significantly improved. China has established the
world’s largest social security system. The number of people covered by basic medical
insurance has surpassed 1.3 billion, and the number of those covered by basic old-age
insurance has now exceeded 1 billion. China has completed the building of a moderately
prosperous society in all respects. The entire country has shaken off absolute poverty and
embarked on the road to common prosperity. The people have gained a stronger sense of
fulfillment, happiness and security. Their rights to subsistence, development and health
are fully protected, and their economic, political, cultural, social, environmental, and
other rights keep expanding.
The Chinese people can see their rights being steadily enriched and improved. After the
founding of the PRC in 1949, they began to seek subsistence and development on the
36

basis of political and economic equality; after the launch of reform and opening up in
1978, they began to pursue both material and cultural prosperity; in this new era, China
has eliminated absolute poverty, completed the building of a moderately prosperous
society in all respects, made great strides towards common prosperity, and achieved
remarkable successes in the fight against Covid-19. Throughout this course, the rights
enjoyed by the Chinese people have expanded in scope and depth, and steady progress
has been made in achieving the free and well-rounded development of the individual.
Panel 9 The Civil Code of the People’s Republic of China
On May 28, 2020, the Third Session of the 13th NPC adopted the Civil Code of the
People’s Republic of China, which took effect on January 1, 2021. The first law defined as a
“code” in the PRC, the Civil Code consists of seven Books – “General Part”, “Real Rights”,
“Contracts”, “Personality Rights”, “Marriage and Family”, “Succession” and “Tort Liability”,
in a total of 1,260 articles. The Civil Code embodies the principle of people-centered
development, in full consideration of the people’s expectation for a better life, and provides
clear stipulations on citizens’ rights, including personal rights, property rights and personality
rights. It reflects China’s efforts to fully protect the rights of the people.

2. Expanding Democratic Participation
If the people are awakened only to cast a vote but become dormant afterwards, that is no
true democracy. If the people are offered great hopes during electoral campaigning but
have no say afterwards, that is no true democracy. If the people are offered fulsome
promises during electoral canvassing but are left empty-handed afterwards, that is no
true democracy. In China, the concept of democracy has taken root in the people’s
minds, and the practice of democracy has become an integral part of daily life and work,
resulting in wide and sustained democratic participation. Democracy has become the
norm, injecting great vitality into Chinese society.
The Chinese people are showing greater interest in democratic participation, which is
expanding in scope and depth. The people participate in the management of state affairs,
social affairs, and economic and cultural affairs; they provide opinions and suggestions

37

for the design of national development plans at the highest level, and also contribute to
the governance of local public affairs; they take part in democratic elections,
consultations, decision-making, management, and oversight; they express their
aspirations and demands through channels such as the people’s congresses and the
CPPCC, and through platforms like social organizations and the internet. Continuous
innovations in the forms and channels of democracy have broadened participation:
Electronic voting has replaced “bean voting”; people no longer need to deliver their
demands to government departments in person, but can turn to online channels. Public
participation is seen throughout the process of determining what the Party and the
government should do and how, and how to assess its results.
The people’s demands can be freely expressed and effectively fulfilled. Democracy starts
with the full expression of the people’s wishes, but if people can only voice their wishes
but have no way to fulfill them, that is no real democracy. China has ensured that its
people have channels to express their aspirations, wishes and demands on issues ranging
from important national strategies and policies to social governance and basic necessities
of life, enabling their voices to be heard and their requests to be answered.
Through the democratic decision-making process, the people’s aspirations and voices
can become the guiding principles and policies of the Party and the state. These
principles and policies embody the people’s expectations and are implemented through
cooperative and effective efforts by governments at central, provincial, city, county, and
township levels, through the division of work and teamwork of departments responsible
for leadership, management, coordination and support, and through the collaboration and
synergy of such activities as decision-making, implementation, inspection, scrutiny, and
accountability. Concerning problems directly impacting their personal interests, people
38

can make suggestions and demands via channels like the online petition, “leaders’
mailboxes”, government service hotlines, and online message boards, which can enable
timely feedback and responses.
Panel 10 Ensuring the People Can Voice Their Demands Freely and Conveniently
During the drafting of the proposals for the 14th Five-year Plan, the CPC Central Committee
solicited views and suggestions from people from all walks of life and set up an online platform
for this purpose. A deputy secretary of a village’s Party branch submitted a proposal on mutual
aid for the aged, which was incorporated into a document of the Fifth Plenary Session of the
19th CPC Central Committee.
In early 2021, the NPC Standing Committee solicited public feedback on the draft law on
food waste. The 15 community-level legislation liaison stations in Yiwu City, Zhejiang Province
held face-to-face meetings in catering business at the grassroots to collect comments and advice
from owners of local restaurants, convenience stores, and small hotels. Their proposals were
adopted and turned into stipulations in the final version of the law.
After the outbreak of Covid-19, an NPC deputy made a proposal on using AI-based lung CT
scans to facilitate the early detection of Covid-19 cases. The NPC transferred the proposal to
relevant departments, and it was quickly adopted.
Panel 11 Ensuring the People’s Demands Are Answered
Government service commitments such as “enforcement departments responding
immediately to the call of grassroots communities”, “zero-delay response” and “immediate
response upon receipt of complaint” have been set up to address public concerns in many
places of China. They form a rapid, efficient work process that involves listening to and
categorizing suggestions and complaints, assigning them to the appropriate departments, giving
feedback, and conducting supervision. In this way, governments at all levels truly respond to
public demands and address the issues and problems that directly concern the public.
The 12345 government service hotlines are public service platforms run by municipal
governments in China. The platforms integrate channels such as the 12345 call center, “mayor’s
mailbox”, SMS, mobile app, Weibo, and WeChat to allow the public to voice their demands, and
provide a 24/7 service. In recent years, the call completion rate of the 12345 hotlines around the
country has steadily increased, making them a useful avenue to address public concerns. In
2020, the average call completion rate of the hotlines reached 72.3 percent, and the average wait
time was 16.2 seconds. Through encouraging everyone to take on responsibilities and participate
in scrutiny, the 12345 hotlines help improve government services and safeguard people’s
legitimate rights and interests.
The “Message Board for Leaders” (liuyan.people.com.cn) is a national online public service
platform enabling principal officials of ministries and commissions of China’s State Council as
well as local governments and Party committees at various levels to hear public concerns. Since
its inception in 2006, the platform has enabled nearly 2.8 million public requests, suggestions
and complaints to be heard and addressed.

3. Efficient National Governance
Democracy and national governance operate in parallel. Progress in democracy and
modernization of national governance are interdependent and mutually reinforcing. It is
39

hard to see how a country can serve as a good example for the rest of the world if its own
model of democracy is unsuccessful or inefficient in national governance. One essential
feature of a good model of democracy is that it will promote sound governance and boost
national development.
High-quality democracy in China has improved the system, capacity and efficiency of
national governance. Democracy has given prominence to the people’s principal status
and reinforced their sense of being masters of the country. The people are the builders
and beneficiaries of democracy. They fully tap into their own wisdom and strength to
create a better life and make the country stronger.
Democracy in China effectively regulates political relations and fosters vibrant
relationships among political parties, ethnic groups, religions, social groups, and
compatriots at home and abroad. It bolsters national cohesion by minimizing internal
friction, maintains political unity and stability, and creates great synergy in developing
the country.
Democracy in China gives full expression to the guidelines of the CPC, the will of the
state, and the expectations of the people, uniting the Party, the government and the
people behind shared goals, interests and aspirations. This generates a huge cohesive
force that translates into one of China’s great institutional strengths – the ability to pool
resources to accomplish major initiatives. It has helped unleash and develop the
productive forces, incentivize all sectors in the drive for modernization, and raise the
quality of life.
Democracy in China has always put the people first and improved their wellbeing. It has
safeguarded national independence and protected national sovereignty, security and
development interests.
40

Over the seven decades since the founding of the PRC, the CPC has led the people in
overcoming formidable difficulties, opening a distinctive Chinese path to modernization,
and achieving remarkable successes. There has been a marked increase in China’s
economic and composite national strength, and a notable improvement in the people’s
living standards.
China is the largest developing country. It hosts one fifth of the world population, but its
per capita resource endowment is low. Its success today would have been impossible
without the people’s determination to run their own country and create a better life for
themselves. Democracy in China means people-centered development that fully
mobilizes the initiative of the people, relies on their strength, and ensures that all share in
the benefits. This is the key to sound governance and the fount of democracy in China.
4. Social Stability and Harmony
Democracy is both a result and a marker of social progress. Democracy can only thrive
in a society based on freedom, equality, justice, civility, unity and harmony. A good
model of democracy should build consensus rather than creating social rifts and
conflicts, safeguard social equity and justice rather than widening social disparities in
favor of vested interests, maintain social order and stability rather than causing chaos and
turmoil, and inspire positivity and appreciation of the good and the beautiful rather than
instigating negativity and promoting the false and the evil.
China’s complex national conditions pose a set of unique challenges in governing the
country. Through people’s democracy, China has balanced the demands and interests of
all social groups and strengthened national unity based on their shared ideas, interests
and goals. The people can live and work in contentment, in a stable, vibrant and
harmonious social environment.
41

In just a few decades, China has gone through a process of industrialization that took the
developed countries centuries to complete. Despite undergoing this dramatic
transformation, it has avoided the social unrest which has afflicted many lateindustrializing economies in the process of modernization. Instead, it has maintained
rapid economic growth and lasting social stability.
In China, personal liberty has developed to an extent never before seen in several
thousand years of history. Creativity and potential for innovation have been fully
unleashed, and people enjoy freedom of speech and mobility.
Every day in China, people travel freely across the country; 16,000 new companies are
created; 1 billion people surf the internet, accessing news, communicating with other
people, and expressing their views.
While China has become an open and free society, it has maintained order and stability
and promoted unity and harmony. People’s democracy is the propellant as well as the
lubricant for China’s social progress.
5. Effective Constraint and Supervision of the Exercise of Power
Power is a double-edged sword. It can only contribute to democracy and benefit the
people when it is exercised under effective constraints and supervision. Unchecked, it is
always likely to run out of control, sabotage democracy, and harm the people. In China,
the exercise of power has been brought under growing control and supervision. Public
power, entrusted by the people, is and will always be exercised for the public good.
Restraining power in an institutional cage. Checks on and supervision over power are
being strengthened under solid institutions, ensuring measures against corruption are
thorough, all-encompassing, consistent and long-lasting. Ongoing efforts have been
made to govern the CPC by regulations, and to promote law-based governance, law42

based exercise of state power, and law-based government administration. Power is
prescribed by law, and regulated, constrained, and supervised by legal means, to ensure
it is exercised transparently. The CPC has taken measures to strengthen its regulations,
and requires all its members and organizations to act within the scope of Party discipline
and rules. Officials’ term of office has been introduced for leadership positions, ensuring
the orderly transition of leadership personnel in state organs. Management of officials,
especially high-ranking officials, has been strengthened, with strict and clearly-defined
rules over their incomes and entitlements to prevent the evolution of a privileged elite.
The supervisory systems of the Party and the state have been improved; the Party, the
government, the judiciary, and all sectors have become more transparent in handling
affairs; leading Party and state organs and their personnel work within their statutory
limits, with clear powers and responsibilities and following statutory procedures. All this
prevents rent-seeking and ensures that the exercise of power does not stray beyond the
proper boundaries.
Fighting and punishing corruption. Corruption is the arch-enemy of people’s democracy.
The Chinese government is determined to honor its commitment to 1.4 billion Chinese
people by fighting corruption. With systemic efforts to address both the symptoms and
root causes, the awareness, ability and resolve to resist corruption form an integral,
coordinated whole. While punishments are meted out to deter crime, institutional checks
and personal commitment to staying clean also play a role. No refuge has been excluded
from the scope, no ground left unturned, and no tolerance shown in the fight against
corruption. China will continue to impose tight constraints, maintain a tough stance and
long-term deterrence, and punish both those who take bribes and those who offer them.
No case of corruption will escape investigation and no corrupt official will go
43

unpunished. Just as a heavy dose of medicine will be taken to treat a serious disease,
China will fight with all the means necessary to “hunt down tigers”, “swat flies”, “chase
foxes” and mete out severe punishments to corrupt officials – big or small, in China or
seeking refuge overseas. Strong, decisive measures have struck down corruption like
thunder, forming a powerful deterrence that has helped to consolidate China’s sweeping
victory in the fight against corruption. To solve this persistent malaise, a thorn in the
flesh of all governments regardless of time or place, China has taken a clear stance and
responded with resolute action.
Whether a model of democracy works should be tested in actual practice and judged by
the people. Whether China’s model of democracy is successful should be judged by its
people. It all boils down to whether the people can enjoy a good life. Surveys have
shown that the level of public satisfaction with the government has remained above 90
percent for many years. This provides unequivocal evidence of the efficacy and vitality
of democracy in China. The Chinese people will continue firmly on the path they have
chosen to achieve greater democracy.

V. A New Model of Democracy
44

Democracy is a political form that has taken shape over the course of thousands of years.
It has played a significant role in human development. Since the onset of the 20th
century, democracy has made little progress in some countries, and others have found
themselves in a state of turmoil and even have split apart. Today’s world is facing
challenges of excessive democracy, democracy implemented in great haste, democratic
deficit and fading democracy. What has happened to democracy? Does it still work? The
answers to these questions will influence world peace and development and the future of
all civilizations. There is nothing wrong with democracy per se. Some countries have
encountered setbacks and crises in their quest for democracy only because their approach
was wrong.
In promoting democracy, China has undergone a difficult process of selection,
experimentation, practice and development. China has created and developed wholeprocess people’s democracy in line with its national conditions. This is a form of
democracy with distinctive Chinese features which at the same time reflects humanity’s
universal desire for democracy. It has fueled the development of the country and driven
the revitalization of the nation. It has contributed a new model to the international
political spectrum.
1. Exploring New Paths to Democracy
It is extremely important, yet also very difficult, for a country on the road to
modernization to promote democracy while ensuring political stability and social
progress.
China did not follow the established path of Western countries in its modernization
drive. Similarly, China did not duplicate Western models of democracy, but created its
own. Now, the entire Chinese population, almost one fifth of the world’s total, enjoys
45

extensive rights and freedoms. This is most encouraging to developing countries and
greatly enhances their confidence in developing their own democracy. China’s new
approach to democracy represents a significant contribution to international politics and
human progress.
The original aspiration of China’s democracy was to ensure the people’s status as
masters of the country. China’s path to democracy has been rocky and tortuous.
Nevertheless, the nation has remained unshaken in its determination to pursue
democracy based on its original aspiration. In today’s China, the goal of ensuring the
people’s status as masters of the country has grown richer in content, wider in channels,
and greater in impact, driving democracy in China onward.
An accurate understanding and a determination to forge ahead are preconditions and the
key for realizing, developing, and enriching democracy. A sound and genuine democracy
must allow the people to become masters of the country. It must allow them to enjoy the
right to stand for election, the right to vote, and the right to extensive participation. It
must allow them the right to express their expectations and the right to have those
expectations fulfilled. It must allow them the right to contribute to national development
and the right to share the fruits of development.
2. Following the Most Suitable Path to Democracy
Democracy is rich in form, and there are many ways to achieve it. Countries with
different histories, cultures and national conditions may choose different forms of
democracy. Blindly copying other models of democracy is a problematic endeavor – it
risks creating cultural conflict, political volatility or even social turmoil and causing
great pain to its people.

46

It is of vital importance for China to choose a path to democracy suited to a vast country
with a large population. China draws on each and every political achievement of other
countries, but does not imitate any of their models of democracy. China welcomes all
constructive suggestions and well-intentioned criticism, but rejects any form of
overbearing lecture. China must devise the most suitable form of democracy in
accordance with its characteristics and realities – a basic principle China adheres to for
developing democracy.
As a populous country long plagued by weak economic foundations, China strives to
strike a balance between democracy and development. The priority always rests with
development, which is facilitated by democracy and in turn boosts the development of
democracy. China has never indulged in empty talk on democracy regardless of a
country’s development stage.
Always drawing wisdom and strength from its 5,000-year-old culture and fine traditions,
and based on a correct understanding of its current development stage and its economic
and social conditions, China has made active and prudent efforts to advance democracy.
To avoid fatal errors, it never seeks unrealistic goals or over-extends itself in pursuit of
quick success. Instead, it focuses on identifying and resolving each and every problem,
and presses ahead with democracy step by step to make the system more mature and
well-defined.
There are no identical political systems in the world, neither is there a political model
that fits all. Countries can borrow from the successful experience of others and develop
forms of democracy suited to their own modernization process, but they should not
simply duplicate other systems or models. The model that suits best is always the most
appropriate. Only democracy rooted in a country’s unique social environment has proven
47

to be reliable and effective, and can thrive and progress. External interference and
“democratic transformation” bring nothing but endless trouble. China never seeks to
export the Chinese model of democracy, nor does it allow any external force to change
the Chinese model under any circumstances. It firmly supports the independent choice
by every country of its own path to democracy, and opposes any interference in others’
internal affairs on the pretext of “bringing democracy”.
3. Promoting Democracy in International Relations
Democracy manifests itself in two dimensions: On a national level, it refers to the
people’s status as masters of their own country; on an international level, it refers to the
democratic relations between nations.
A country’s dignity should be respected, and its sovereignty, security and development
interests are inviolable. To judge other countries by one’s own yardstick, or force them
to duplicate one’s own political system or democratic model through color revolution or
the threat of force are undemocratic in themselves.
China is a faithful and exemplary actor in pursuing, exploring and practicing democracy.
It endeavors to increase democracy both within its own territory and between nations. At
a time of momentous change of a scale unseen in a century, China champions peace,
development, cooperation and mutual benefit. China proposes to build a global
community of shared future, and presses for a new model of international relations based
on mutual respect, fairness and justice, and win-win cooperation. At a time of intense
global competition in the economic, scientific, technological and other fields, China
regards other countries as partners rather than rivals – it does not engage in cold war,
confrontation, control or manipulation, but rather promotes mutually beneficial
exchanges and cooperation.
48

China has actively developed global partnerships. It works to establish a framework of
major-country relations that is generally stable and balanced. In developing relations
with neighboring countries, it applies the principles of amity, sincerity, inclusiveness,
mutual benefit, and the policy of promoting friendly and neighborly ties. In
strengthening cooperation with other developing countries, China pursues the greater
good and shared interests, and applies the principles of sincerity, affinity, good faith and
real results. China has strengthened exchanges and cooperation with countries
participating in the Belt and Road Initiative and shared the gains with them, expanding
the initiative into more regions and turning it into a well-received global public good.
The present world is far from fair and just, equal and democratic. A small number of
countries ignore international law, flout international justice, disdain international public
opinion, flagrantly infringe upon the sovereignty of other countries, and interfere with
others’ internal affairs. They frequently abuse and dictate to smaller and weaker
countries, turning the “global village” into a primeval jungle where the strong prey on
the weak. In a world confronted by challenges, all countries, large or small, strong or
weak, rich or poor, are equals, and should uphold the principle of democracy in
international relations. Powerful countries should behave as befits their status, make the
future of humanity their priority, and shoulder greater responsibility for world peace and
development, rather than wielding their power in pursuit of supremacy or hegemony.
The future of the world should rest in the hands of all peoples of the world. International
rules should be made by all countries, global affairs should be governed by all parties,
and the fruits of development should be shared by all.
4. Increasing Exchanges and Mutual Learning Between Civilizations

49

There is no single road to democracy. The true barrier to democracy lies not in different
models of democracy, but in arrogance, prejudice and hostility towards other countries’
attempts to explore their own paths to democracy, and in assumed superiority and the
determination to impose one’s own model of democracy on others.
Political systems vary from civilization to civilization, and each has its own strengths.
All countries should uphold the principle of nondiscrimination, respect others’ models of
democracy, share experience with others, explore their own paths, and contribute their
due share to human progress.
One Person, One Vote is a democratic principle, but it is by no means the only principle,
nor does it of itself create democracy. However, it has long been misinterpreted and its
meaning distorted by a small number of countries. The principles of One Person, One
Vote and party competition underlying the Western electoral system are propagated by
them as the sole criterion for democracy. A handful of countries exploit democracy as a
political tool. Adopting the hegemonic mindset that “whoever disagrees with me is
wrong”, they interfere in the internal affairs of others in the name of democracy, and
infringe on their sovereignty to serve their own political interests. They also incite
antagonism and secession on the pretext of “bringing democracy”, causing endless
instability in many parts of the world and aggravating international tensions. To advance
human progress and achieve peaceful coexistence and common development, all
countries must understand and promote genuine democracy.
Political parties in all countries are the major entities of modern governance and an
important force for social progress. They should therefore assume their responsibility to
spearhead democracy in pursuit of a shared future for humanity, and to achieve greater
democracy in their own countries in pursuit of the greater wellbeing of their peoples.
50

They should be open and inclusive, put people first, seek common ground while setting
aside differences, and demonstrate mutual respect. The CPC is willing to work together
with other political parties and political organizations around the world to increase
exchanges, learn from each other, and promote human progress.

Conclusion
There is always scope for improving the system of democracy. Humanity’s quest for and
experiments with greater democracy will never end.
China has achieved considerable progress in developing democracy; to meet the new
requirements of modernization and the people’s new expectations for democracy, China
still needs to make further improvements. On the path towards comprehensive socialist
modernization, the CPC will continue to uphold people’s democracy, embrace the
people-centered development philosophy, promote whole-process people’s democracy,
ensure the sound development of democracy, and pursue well-rounded human
development and common prosperity for everyone.
Today’s world is experiencing change on a scale unseen in a century. It can anticipate
hopes and opportunities as well as risks and challenges. All paths to democracy chosen
by the peoples themselves deserve proper respect. We should pursue peaceful
development, safeguard fairness and justice, increase democracy and freedom, and
improve the people’s wellbeing. This is the only way to build synergy among all
civilizations in the quest for a better future.
Civilizations are enriched by exchanges and mutual learning. The Chinese people are
willing to work together with all other peoples around the world to carry forward the
common values of humanity – peace, development, fairness, justice, democracy and
freedom. In a spirit of mutual respect and following the principle of seeking common
51

ground while setting aside differences, we will add new elements to the world’s political
structure and advance towards a global community of shared future together.

52

